# BRG-27-labs

Lab Activities Docementation

Introduction
	
 This readme file explains the hands-on lab activities from the module “Introduction to Server Environments and Architectures”.  It covers various topics like setting up a Linux environment, creating a GitHub repository, and the different Linux services such as Apache 2, and Ubuntu firewall. 

Setting up Linux and GitHub

The first activity in session 1 was to install Ubuntu and setup a Linux environment.  I first created a GitHub account and repository to view the details of the lab activities and added a readme file for documentation.  I chose VirtualBox as my virtualization tool because the installation process was straight forward compared to VMware Workstation.  In VirtualBox I chose the Ubuntu ISO image version 25.04.  This activity taught me that you can run an operating system from a different one with the help of a virtualization tool.  I had to be careful with how many CPUs and memory I will allocate because it can impact the performance of my computer.  This was my first time trying Linux, I explored the different applications and commands on the terminal.  I then realized that you could save the current state of the machine by taking snapshots.  I learned to be cautious with how many snapshots I take because it will consume storage space. 

Linux Services

Installing and getting familiar with different Linux services was the next activity.  I first installed apache2 which was a web server.  The command nano is used to edit the html content within the webpage.  I realized that I had to use another command called Chmod 777 to handle a permission error when I tried to save the changes I made to the html.  Gedit was another way to edit the html page it is a Gui based editor, compared to Nano which is terminal based.  I learned that Nmap is used to scan for ports from another virtual machine.  I created a new virtual machine to scan for ports in the other virtual machine that had Apache 2 running it detected port 22 and port 80.  Ubuntu firewall is used to deny any incoming connections unless I allow access to a specific port.  I used the firewall on the virtual machine with Apache 2, the ports cannot be detected since all incoming connections are now blocked but port 80 was detected after I allowed access to it.  SSH is a program that will allow you to access your terminal from another machine.  I tested this by creating another user named Matthew on the virtual machine with Apache 2, then on the new virtual machine I logged in as the user Matthew.  This is done by typing ssh followed by the name of the user and the Ip address of the virtual machine the user is from.  When I was doing the activity to compress a directory called books, I learned that the tar command is used to convert the directory into an archive.  Bzip2 is used to compress a directory or an archive. 

Linux Permissions

The next activity was about Linux permissions three users had to be created called Alice, Bob, and Mallory.  I created a directory called shared within the home directory and added files into it.  I used groupadd and adduser to move the users into the same group.  I learned about the 3 different permission types which are owner, group, and others. I used chmod to assign different permission types to each user.  To test if I successfully assigned the permissions I logged in to each user and checked if I can read, write, or execute based on the user’s permission type.  There are also other commands I used, whoami displays the name of the user that you are currently logged into and ls -al shows permissions that each user has for different directories. 

Searching Filesystems

The final activity for session 1 was to search for files on filesystems.  I learned about the find command which is used to search for files and directories based on a specific character or a text within a certain structure.  It can locate files based on modification and creation dates like a recently modified file or a file with the oldest creation date.  It can also find files based on its size.  The find command needs additional parameters based on what kind of file you want to get.  Sed is another command that displays the frequency of elements in a file it also needs parameters.

Total Cost of Ownership

In session 2 the first activity was to calculate and compare the total cost of ownership for two printers.  The HP Smart Tank 580 and the HP LazerJet Enterprise M48Of were the printers that I selected.  I listed down their essential items such as paper, power, and Ink and if they are fixed or variable costs.   I provided assumptions like how long the printer can last and how many pages it can print per week.  I also included the unit price for each item and the overall cost in 5 years.   To conclude my research the Hp Smart Tank printer is good for home use because it is cheaper and the costs for maintenance will be less.  It is not recommended for business use since it might need to print more than 500 pages per week which would mean it would not last for 5 years.  The Hp LazerJet Enterprise printer is good for business use because its higher quality and uses toner instead of ink.  It can also print more pages per week.  It is not optimal for home use because it is bigger and more expensive.  Doing this activity made me realize that aside from the unit price there can be additional expenses and costs that might not be noticed when you purchase a product.

Cloud Deployment
	
 Microsoft Azure Is what chose to set up my Linux virtual machine on the cloud.  I first had to create an Azure account after signing in I had to click on virtual machines.  Under instance details I provided the name of the machine and its iso image.  After going through additional settings, I clicked on create and waited for the machine to be deployed.  Once deployment is complete, I clicked on go to resource and connect which is where I will activate my virtual machine through SSH.  I downloaded the SSH private key file they provided, copied its path, and paste it to the windows power shell which actives the virtual machine.  Running a cloud virtual machine has its benefits, you can transfer files from the virtual machine running own your own computer to the cloud.  This is a good way to back up your files just in case the virtual machine is not functioning properly.

Bash Coding   
	
 The final activity for session 2 was to create and execute bash scripts.  The first script I made displays the text “This is a bash scripting lab” the command echo is used to display texts.  The command cat is used to display the file content, to copy the file I used cp and to remove a file I used rm.  I learned that the shebang character sequence #!/bin/bash must be included at the top of every bash script, it instructs the operating system to use bash as the command interpreter.  Just like other languages bash has different kinds of loops the common ones are for, while, and until, these loops allow a script to execute multiple times.  I created a new script called system info this script uses the for loop.  It first displays your Linux username, then in the for loop it iterates through number 1 to 5.  After that it asks you to enter a number between 1 and 10, if you enter a non-numeric value the script will prompt an error message that says, “Invalid input”.  The script has an if statement that checks if you entered a number that is less than or equal to 5.  It has an elif statement to check if you entered a number that is greater than 5 but less than or equal to 10.  If you enter a number that is not between 1 and 10, the script will display an error message that says, “Number out of range”.  To run the script, I must enter ./ followed by the file name.  The last script I created is called resource monitor, it first asks the user to enter a number that number will be how many times the system is monitored.  The program will enter a for loop that will iterate based on the number provided by the user.  As it iterates it displays the systems CPU usage with the top command, memory usage with the free command, and disk usage with the df command.  To also monitor network usage ifstat can be used to show that basic statistics of the network, nload can display incoming and outgoing network traffic.  A script like resource monitor is beneficial for administrators because it allows them to quickly respond to potential issues in the system.

DNS and Digital Certificates
	
 The first activity for session 3 was to purchase a domain name and link it to my webpage on the Azure virtual machine.  First, I had to install apache2 on the cloud machine and added inbound port rules to allow port 80 and 22.  I opened its webpage in the browser to test if the installation was successful. I chose AWS Route 53 to purchase my domain name which was called test.matthewygyu.com I added a record that pointed the public Ip address of my cloud machine to that domain name.  After a few minutes of waiting for the domain name to register my webpage was able to run under that domain name.  I had to get a digital certificate through certbot since the domain name is still labeled as not secure.  I followed the instructions from the certbot website.  I installed both snapd and certbot in the virtual machine and ran the command certbot –apache to get the certificate and have certbot automatically configure my apache settings.  I went to my webpage and saw the lock icon next to my domain name which confirms that my digital certificate was properly setup.



Scripting Linux Server Functions
	
 The final activity for session 3 was to create a script that will backup the files from a directory called documents into a directory called backup.  Cron will be used to schedule the execution of the script every hour.  There are 5 files, and a sub directory called test folder with more files within documents.  The script has a variable called now which stores the current date and its displayed using the echo command.  It has a command called cp -R which recursively copies contents within documents to the backup directory.  Zip -r will zip the backup directory and move it to another directory with the current date.  I entered the crontab file to configure the script to run every hour the command was 0 followed by 4 asterisks and the path to the script file.  When the script is executed, it shows todays date and all the files that are being added to the backup directory.  I also exported the backup zip file to my cloud virtual machine using a command that included the ssh key, username, and public Ip address from the cloud.

Final Reflection on Lab Activities
	
 The lab activities helped me in setting up and running a virtual machine and familiarizing myself with the Linux operating system.  It also introduced me to the Linux terminal which is where I used a lot of commands like touch and cat.  Creating bash scripts within the terminal has helped me understand the syntax of the bash language and it made realize that scripts can help automate repetitive tasks in the terminal.  I learned that using the cloud can be another way to run a virtual machine. It can be an advantage since it would be running on the cloud providers computing resources instead of your own computer’s resources.  Going through the lab activities was a fun experience and I will continue to learn and improve in Linux and the cloud.
